Model ensembling as a tool to form interpretable multi-omic predictors of cancer pharmacosensitivity.
Abstract:
The determination of the optimal treatment for individual patients presenting with cancer is the major goal of personalized oncology, a rapidly-growing field of modern medicine. One important aspect is the accurate prediction of the response of cancer cells to various chemotherapies, as patients frequently fail to respond adequately to first-line therapies, or develop resistance over time. It is expected that the molecular characteristics of the neoplasic cells (genomic, transcriptomic, etc.) contain enough information to retrieve specific signatures, in turn allowing to form accurate predictions based solely on these multi-omic data. Ideally, these predictions should be explainable to clinicians, in order to be integrated in the patients care. While a number of computational methods have been developed over the years, very few have been assessed in a clinical setting, and none has been integrated in standard cancer care. We propose a machine-learning framework based on ensemble learning to integrate multi-omic data and predict chemosensitivity to an array of commonly used drugs. We trained an array of classifiers on the different parts of our dataset to produce omic-specific features, and subsequently trained a random-forest classifier on these features to predict chemosensitivity. We used the CCLE dataset, comprising multi-omic and chemosensitivity measurements for hundreds of cell lines, to build the models, and we validated our results using leave-one-out validation strategy. Our results show superior performance to the state-of-the-art for several drugs, belonging to different compound classes, and across the most frequent cancer types. Furthermore, the relative simplicity of our approach allows to easily examine which features have a larger importance in the models, as well as why a particular prediction was formed for a specific sample. As such, we identify new markers of chemosensitivity and their links to known cancer pathways and to druggable targets. Importantly, our models are flexible and can adapt to missing data, for example when the measurement of some omics type is not clinically feasible. Overall, our approach has the potential to be a useful tool in a personalized oncology setting, by helping clinicians to link the characteristics of the tumors to their sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs, and ultimately to the clinical response in patients.

id: sebdelandtsheer@gmail.com
pwd: 2LargeBlueBananas
 